Project Title: PhishGuard – AI-Based Phishing Website Detection System
Intern: Thanniru Vaishnavi
Program: Infosys Springboard Virtual Internship 6.0 (8 weeks)
Duration: 27 November 2025 – 21 January 2026
2. Project Objective
The main objective of this project was to design and implement an AI-driven phishing website
detection system. PhishGuard aims to analyze any given URL in real time and classify it as “Safe”
or “Malicious”. Given that phishing is one of the most common and dangerous cybersecurity
threats, the system is intended to help users make safer browsing decisions by automatically
identifying deceptive or harmful sites.
3. Project description (Detailed)
PhishGuard is a machine learning–powered web application developed to detect phishing
websites by analyzing various URL-based features. The project was executed in multiple phases,
from initial problem understanding through final deployment. Initially, a dataset containing both
legitimate and malicious URLs was collected and studied. Data preprocessing was applied – for
example, removing duplicate entries, handling missing or malformed values, and normalizing
URL strings – to improve data quality.
Next, feature extraction converted each URL into a set of numerical features. Common URLbased features were extracted, such as the total URL length, hostname length, number of dots,
and other structural attributes. For example, very long URLs or those containing an IP address
instead of a domain name are often indicative of phishing. The features also included the
presence of HTTPS, the count of suspicious keywords (e.g. “login”, “verify”), and the domain age
(newly-registered domains are often used by attackers).
After feature engineering, multiple machine learning models were trained and evaluated.
Classifiers such as Logistic Regression, Decision Trees, Random Forest, and XGBoost were
compared using metrics like accuracy, precision, and recall. In our experiments, XGBoost
consistently provided the best classification performance and handled feature interactions
robustly, so it was selected as the final model. The trained model was serialized (saved) for
deployment in the next phase.
The trained model was integrated into a Flask-based REST API. This API accepts a usersubmitted URL, applies the same feature extraction steps in real time, and uses the model to
predict whether the URL is safe or malicious. The prediction result (along with a confidence
score) is returned to the client in JSON format. Finally, a responsive web front end was
developed to allow users to enter URLs and view the results. The interface supports user login
and maintains a history of scanned URLs for each user, making the application more practical
and user-friendly.

4. Timeline Overview
The internship began with an orientation and project setup phase from 27 November 2025 to 30
November 2025, which included the kick-off call, technology overview, and task allocation. The
actual project execution was carried out over eight weeks from 1 December 2025 to 21 January
2026, following the milestone structure defined by Infosys Springboard.
A summary of planned and completed activities is presented below:
Week 1 (1–7 December 2025) – Milestone 1:
Planned: Dataset research and problem understanding.
Completed: Dataset analysis, identification of trusted data sources, and project planning.
Week 2 (8–14 December 2025) – Milestone 1:
Planned: Data collection, cleaning, and preprocessing.
Completed: URL normalization, removal of duplicate and invalid URLs, and feature preparation.
Week 3 (15–21 December 2025) – Milestone 2:
Planned: Feature extraction and model training.
Completed: Feature engineering and training of multiple machine learning models.
Week 4 (22–28 December 2025) – Milestone 2:
Planned: Model evaluation and optimization.
Completed: Model comparison, hyperparameter tuning, and final selection of the XGBoost
classifier.
Week 5 (29 December 2025 – 4 January 2026) – Milestone 3:
Planned: Backend API and frontend UI development.
Completed: Development of Flask-based ML API and initial React-based user interface.
Week 6 (5–11 January 2026) – Milestone 3:
Planned: UI enhancement and integration.
Completed: Frontend–backend integration, authentication implementation, and UI testing.

Week 7 (12–18 January 2026) – Milestone 4:
Planned: Documentation and presentation preparation.
Completed: Preparation of project report, screenshots, and presentation slides.
Week 8 (19–21 January 2026) – Milestone 4:
Planned: Final review and submission.
Completed: Final documentation submission, presentation, and project closure.
5a. Key Milestones
Milestone 1 (1 December – 10 December 2025):
Dataset research, data collection, cleaning, preprocessing, and feature extraction.
Milestone 2 (11 December – 23 December 2025):
Machine learning model selection, training, evaluation, hyperparameter tuning, and final
model selection.
Milestone 3 (24 December 2025 – 9 January 2026):
Frontend UI development, backend API integration, authentication, and system testing.
Milestone 4 (10 January – 21 January 2026):
Project documentation, presentation preparation, final submission, and evaluation.
The project was executed using a structured, phase-by-phase approach. The initial phase
focused on understanding phishing attack patterns and studying how malicious URLs differ from
legitimate ones. Based on this analysis, relevant datasets containing phishing and legitimate
URLs were collected from trusted sources.
During the data preprocessing phase, the raw URL dataset was cleaned by removing duplicate
entries, invalid or corrupted URLs, and missing values. URL formats were normalized to ensure
consistency across the dataset, which helped improve the reliability of feature extraction and
model training.
Feature engineering played a crucial role in the system’s performance. Each URL was parsed to
extract meaningful features such as URL length, number of dots, presence of an IP address,
usage of HTTPS, suspicious keywords, and domain age. For example, URLs containing IP
addresses or newly registered domains are commonly associated with phishing attacks. These
extracted attributes were combined into numerical feature vectors suitable for machine learning
models.
After feature extraction, the dataset was split into training and testing sets using a 70:30 ratio.
Multiple machine learning classifiers were trained on the training data and evaluated using the
testing data. Based on performance metrics such as accuracy and consistency, XGBoost
emerged as the best-performing classifier. The final trained model was serialized and deployed
using a Flask-based REST API, which accepts URLs as input, performs feature extraction, and
returns prediction results in JSON format.
On the frontend, a web-based user interface was developed using React (HTML, CSS, and
JavaScript). The interface allows users to enter a URL and submit it for analysis. The request is
first sent to a Node.js and Express-based backend server, which acts as an intermediary layer
between the frontend and the machine learning model.
The Node/Express backend forwards the submitted URL to the Flask-based machine learning
API for prediction. After receiving the classification result, the backend sends the response back
to the frontend. The user interface then displays the result (e.g., “Malicious URL Detected”), along
with a confidence score and a simple risk indicator for better user understanding.
User authentication was implemented to allow users to securely log in and access their personal
scan history. All system components were thoroughly tested, including frontend form submission,
backend request handling, and communication with the Flask API. This ensured smooth and
reliable interaction between the React frontend, Node/Express backend, and Flask-based
machine learning service..
Virtual Internship 6.0
pg. 6
6. Machine Learning Workflow
The ML workflow for PhishGuard followed these steps:
1. Data Collection and Exploration: Gather a labeled dataset of legitimate and
phishing URLs and perform initial analysis.
2. Data Cleaning and Preprocessing: Clean the data by removing duplicates,
correcting formats, and normalizing text.
3. Feature Extraction: Compute features for each URL (length, number of special
characters, domain properties, etc.).
4. Train-Test Split: Divide the dataset ( 70% training, 30% testing) to evaluate
model performance on unseen data.
5. Model Training: Train multiple classifiers (Logistic Regression, Random Forest,
XGBoost) on the training data, tuning hyperparameters via grid search.
6. Model Evaluation: Measure each model’s accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-
score on the test set.
7. Model Selection: Choose XGBoost for deployment, as it yielded the highest
accuracy and robustness.
8. Model Deployment: Serialize the chosen model and load it in the Flask API for
real-time predictions.
7. Feature Extraction
The following URL-based features were engineered:
• URL Length: Total number of characters in the URL. Extremely long URLs can
indicate obfuscation by attackers.
• Hostname Length: Number of characters in the domain/hostname part.
Unusually long hostnames may be suspicious.
• Number of Dots: Count of . characters in the URL. A high number can indicate
many subdomains or IP usage.
• Presence of HTTPS: Boolean indicating if the URL uses https://. Legitimate sites
typically use HTTPS.
• Presence of IP Address: Boolean indicating if the URL uses an IP address
instead of a domain name (often seen in phishing links).
Suspicious Keywords: Count of known phishing-related keywords in the URL
(e.g. “login”, “secure”, “bank”). Phishing URLs often include such terms to appear
credible.
• Domain Age: Age of the domain in days (from WHOIS data). Newly-registered
domains are commonly used in phishing.
These features are well-known heuristics in phishing detection. Each URL in the dataset
was converted into a feature vector using this set.
8. Model Training and Evaluation
Several classifiers were trained on the extracted features, including Logistic Regression,
Decision Tree, Random Forest, and XGBoost. Each model’s predictions were evaluated
on the test set using accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score. Cross-validation was
used to tune hyperparameters (e.g. adjusting tree depth and learning rate).
XGBoost stood out with the best performance, consistent with published results. Its
ability to combine many weak learners into a strong classifier made it well-suited to our
feature set.
The final XGBoost model was serialized (for example, saved with joblib) so that it could
be loaded by the backend service. This trained model now powers the real-time
predictions. During evaluation, confusion matrices confirmed that both phishing and
benign URLs were identified correctly, with a low false positive and false negative rate.
9. Backend API Development
The backend was implemented as a RESTful API using Flask. Key components include:
• Prediction Endpoint: An endpoint ( /predict) that accepts a URL in an HTTP
request. When called, the server:
1. Extracts features from the URL using the same preprocessing logic.
2. Loads the trained XGBoost model and performs a prediction.
3. Returns the result and confidence score in JSON format (e.g.
{"prediction": "Malicious", "confidence": 0.92}).
• User Management: Endpoints for user signup, login, and logout. Secure
password hashing and session handling protect user accounts.

• Scan History: Endpoints to save and retrieve each user’s scan history in a
database. This allows the frontend to display past results to the user.
Input validation and error handling were implemented to ensure robustness (e.g.
verifying valid URL format). The Flask API was tested (using tools like Postman) to
confirm that requests are processed correctly and responses are returned as expected.

10. Frontend Development
A responsive and user-friendly web interface was developed to enable users to
interact with the PhishGuard system. The frontend was implemented using React, along
with HTML, CSS, and JavaScript, to ensure a dynamic and interactive user experience
across different devices.
The main functionalities of the frontend include:
• URL Submission:
The interface provides a text input field and submit button that allow users to
enter a website URL for analysis. Client-side input validation is performed to
ensure the correctness of the URL format before submission.
• Result Display:
After the URL is analyzed, the frontend displays the classification result, clearly
indicating whether the website is “Safe” or “Malicious.” The prediction is
accompanied by a confidence score and a simple visual risk indicator to improve
user understanding.
• User Authentication:
Dedicated pages for user registration and login were implemented. Secure
session management ensures that only authenticated users can access
protected features such as scan history.
• Scan History Dashboard:
Logged-in users can access a personalized dashboard displaying previously
scanned URLs along with their corresponding prediction results. This information
is securely fetched from the backend server.
The user interface design emphasizes clarity, simplicity, and usability.
Asynchronous API communication was implemented using Axios, allowing the
frontend to interact efficiently with the Node.js/Express backend and the Flask-based
machine learning API without requiring full page reloads. After development, the
frontend was integrated and tested with the backend services to ensure seamless data
flow and a smooth overall user experience. 
11. Challenges Faced
During the development of the PhishGuard system, several technical and
implementation challenges were encountered, particularly due to the integration of a
MERN stack application with a machine learning service.
• Feature Engineering:
Identifying the most relevant URL-based features for phishing detection required
extensive research and experimentation. Selecting effective suspicious keywords
and determining meaningful attributes such as domain age and URL structure
involved multiple iterations and validation steps.
• Machine Learning Model Integration:
Integrating the trained machine learning model with the web application was
challenging. Ensuring consistency between the feature extraction process used
during training and the real-time prediction pipeline in the Flask API required
careful serialization and testing.
• MERN Stack and ML Service Communication:
Establishing reliable communication between the React frontend, Node.js and
Express backend, and the Flask-based machine learning API was a key
challenge. Proper request handling, response formatting, and error management
were implemented to ensure smooth data flow across services.
• Deployment and Performance Issues:
Deploying the Flask ML API alongside the Node/Express backend required
managing dependencies, server configurations, and performance optimization.
Handling concurrent requests and maintaining low response latency for real-time
predictions was also a challenge.
• Authentication and Database Management:
Implementing secure user authentication and managing persistent scan history
using MongoDB added complexity. Ensuring secure password storage through
hashing and maintaining data integrity across user sessions required careful
backend design.
These challenges were addressed through systematic testing, debugging, and
iterative development. Unit testing was used to verify individual components such as
feature extraction and model inference, while integration testing ensured smooth end-toend functionality across the MERN stack and machine learning service.

12. Learnings and Skills Acquired
This internship provided valuable hands-on experience. Key learnings include:
• Machine Learning Model Development: Gained practical skills in data
preparation, algorithm selection, model training, and evaluation.
• Feature Engineering from Real Data: Learned how to extract and validate
meaningful features from raw URL data.
• REST API Creation with Flask: Learned how to build and secure API endpoints
that connect a machine learning model to a web client.
• Full-Stack Integration: Understood how frontend and backend components
work together to form a complete application.
• Deployment and Debugging: Acquired experience in deploying a Python web
service and troubleshooting runtime issues to ensure reliability.
Overall, this project strengthened both technical and analytical skills by applying
theoretical concepts to a real-world cybersecurity problem.
13. Conclusion
The PhishGuard project successfully demonstrates an AI-based approach to detecting
phishing websites in real time. By applying machine learning techniques, the system can
automatically analyze URL characteristics and alert users to potential risks. Through this
internship, I gained practical experience in every stage of development — from data
collection and model training to deploying a full-stack application. The project not only
achieved its objective of creating a working phishing detection tool, but also provided an
excellent learning experience. It strengthened my understanding of cybersecurity, data
science, and software development.
14. Acknowledgements
I sincerely thank Infosys Springboard and my project mentors for their guidance and
support throughout this internship. The Springboard program provided a great platform
to apply AI concepts to a real-world cybersecurity problem, and I appreciate the
opportunity and feedback received during this journey.
